---
layout: post
title:  "Hawking Radiation"
author: gurarman
categories: [ cosmology ]
image: assets/images/posts_main/hawking.jpeg
useMath: True
---


We first stumble across black holes in first-grade when that one kid mentions about the heavy-black-circle-thing in his astronomy book, and we’ve been amazed ever since. Today we discuss a fascinating property of these weird objects, which, as Stephen Hawking puts it, is ” Black holes aren’t really that black!”. 

We perceive a black hole to be a place in space where gravity pulls so much that even light can not get out. Therefore, it came as a surprise when Hawking said that black holes radiate stuff too. We qualitatively discuss the arguments briefly.

## Entropy, Surface Area & Radiation!

The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that the total entropy of an isolated system must be a non-decreasing quantity .The Universe is an isolated system. Therefore, as mass falls into the black hole, it’s entropy must increase, as the entropy of the rest of the universe has dropped. But we cannot obtain information from inside a black hole about it’s entropy, since not even light can escape, so how do we know whether the entropy has really increased or is this situation a violation of the law of entropy?

The surface of a black hole (the event horizon) boasts an interesting collection of special features.Hawking argued that the rays on the boundary of the black hole always have to be moving parallel to, or away from, each other, otherwise, would ”fall into” the black hole and would not remain on the boundary. . Decreasing the surface area would mean some rays would have to collide and fall in. So, the surface area would always be non-decreasing if the net energy is flowing inwards/is 0. 

Since surface area increases when when mass falls into a black hole the way entropy should increase , it seems to suggest that the former could be a measure of the latter. While this would prevent violation of the second law, it also predicts something bizarre. Entropy would imply Temperature, and we know that anything that has a non-zero temperature must radiate energy, hence black holes must radiate as well! We discuss in the next section how that happens

## How?
We assume empty space to be devoid of all particles and fields. However, at the quantum level, fields (like gravitational and electromagnetic) and their rates of change obey the uncertainty principle much like the position and velocity of a particle.This uncertainty is governed by the equation

\begin{equation}
\Delta E \Delta t \geq \frac{\hbar}{2}
\end{equation}

where ∆E is the uncertainty of energy of the state in question, and ∆t is the duration for which the state is considered.

(This can be derived from the Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, namely 

\begin{equation}
\Delta x \Delta p \geq \frac{\hbar}{2}
\end{equation}

,where ∆x and ∆p are uncertainties in measurement of position and momentum, respectively. By special relativity, space and time are equivalent; whereas energy and momentum are different components of the same momentum-4 vector. Applying the suitable Lorentz transformation we get this Energy-time uncertainty relation ) 

Even if we consider vacuum to be in the ground state, since ∆t will always be finite, so will ∆E and hence these fields can never be said to be exactly zero. Like we considered dual behaviour of matter and waves, these fields can be considered as particles, forming in pairs and annihilating each other soon. When such a pair of particles is formed near a black hole, it’s possible for one side of the pair to fall in. The one that falls in will be the anti-particle and the particle can get out and escape from the black hole, with some energy. The effect to a distant observer is as if the black hole were spitting out a stream of particles/energy. Radiation from a black hole, named Hawking radiation in his honour.

## Observation and Experiments

Hawking further showed that the spectrum of emitted particles corresponds exactly to the radiation from a hot body, and that the temperature of the black hole depends only on it’s mass; the lower the mass the higher the temperature.

So, if we want to find the brightest sources of Hawking radiation, we have to find the lowest-mass black holes of all. Unfortunately, the minimum mass for a black hole that can be created is somewhere around 2.5 solar masses. It would have a temperature of around 25 nanokelvin, a signal impossible to detect from amongst the background microwave radiation that fills the universe, which is some million times hotter than the Hawking radiation.


Moreover, the background microwave radiation is more significant than the radiation from an average sized black hole by huge orders of magnitude, hence these are currently expanding on the whole. We would have to wait for billions of orders of the age of the universe before the background cools down enough to allow them to start shrinking on their own. 

But this does not mean we do not have any means of confirming or supporting this theory. In 1981 William Unruh of the University of British Columbia showed 2 that the equations predicting Hawking radiation should also apply to sound waves in convergent fluid flow ( sound waves cannot propagate upstream in a supersonic flow, but they can in subsonic flow, which is analogous to black holes and light not being able to move across the event horizon.) The results were as predicted, the measurements of amplitudes of these waves demonstrated that they appear in pairs and the spectra of the process was described by a Boltzmann-distribution

## Referenced from:

1. Hawking radiation: Explained [[Vox](https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2018/3/14/17119320/stephen-hawkinghawking-radiation-explained)]

2. This Is Why We’ll Never Detect Hawking Radiation From An Actual
Black Hole [[Forbes](https://www.forbes.com/sites/startswithabang/2020/07/01/this-is-why-wellnever-detect-hawking-radiation-from-an-actual-black-hole/?sh=1a2d5fd1f0dd)]

