---
layout: post
title:  "A Brief History of Astronomy"
author: ankit
categories: [ astronomy ]
image: assets/images/posts_main/history.png
useMath: True
---

*Since the inception of humanity, we as inherently curious creatures have turned our eyes to the sky full of amazement and inquisitiveness. The phases of the moon, alternation of seasons, rising and setting of the sun, and the periodic movement of heavenly bodies in the sky are some eternal phenomena that have continued to pique human imagination from time to time. We take a look at our journey so far at answering such key questions surrounding us and the gradual emergence of the oldest natural science - Astronomy.*


Early human cultures associated celestial objects in the shimmering night sky with spirits and gods often relating their movement to natural phenomena such as rain, drought, seasons, and tides. As the scope of influence of religion around the planet widened, these celestial objects and events gradually began to be understood as manifestations of the divine thus slowly formulating the principles of what is now known as astrology. Although astrology and astronomy were archaically treated together, the advent of philosophical and rational ideas meant that the latter was now based on rational theories and experimental findings and served as a basis on which the former could operate.


Monitoring the motion of stars and planets in the night sky was a common practice used to track time, which was fundamental for agriculture, navigation, and religious rituals. Sailors and early astronomers, especially those in (now called) China, Egypt, Greece, India, and Central America, noticed interesting patterns amid clusters of stars in the night sky and in a bid to demystify them, started tracking their motion and picturing them, often associating them with gods, goddesses, animals, and objects of their stories. These patterns (now known as constellations) were used for navigation, identifying seasons, agricultural planning, or simply relating to stories of various beliefs.


The Greeks were the first to document evidence that Earth was a sphere. Their claim that the planet’s surface is curved, was based on their observation that the night sky looked different when viewed from various locations on Earth. By measuring the length of the shadow cast by an object in two different locations at the same time and taking into account the distance between those two locations and the difference in the lengths, they were even able to estimate the circumference of Earth quite accurately.


It is now believed that Babylonian Astronomers (Babylonia was an ancient cultural region occupying southeastern Mesopotamia in around 1800 BC to 400 BC) were among the first to recognize planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn -all visible to the naked eye at different times of the year). They tracked these five points of light in the night sky realizing their motion was fundamentally different from that of the other stars thus concluding these differed ‘fundamentally’ from the other stars. The Babylonians also developed a calendar based on the motion of the Sun and the phases of the Moon and were able to predict lunar and solar eclipses accurately.


Before the sixteenth century, Earth was commonly thought to be the center of the universe with all other celestial objects revolving around it. This model, known as the Geocentric Model, was proposed by Claudius Ptolemy in 100 AD. In an important manuscript called Almagest (the only surviving ancient text on Astronomy), Ptolemy described the universe as a set of nested spheres surrounding the Earth, with the moon orbiting on a sphere closest to the earth followed by mercury, venus, sun, and remaining planets. The outermost sphere contained all the stars. Although the model remained much popular and gained huge acceptance (partly due to its intuitiveness), the problem with this theory was that it failed to explain certain observations made by astronomers back then such as the path of certain planets and stars appearing to move backward on their orbits (Retrograde motion) and changes in the appearance of the inferior planets (planets between earth and sun). 


It wasn’t until 1543 that Polish astronomer Nicholas Copernicus (1473-1543) proposed a revised model with the Sun at the center around which all celestial bodies orbited – the heliocentric model of the universe. This was one of the many revolutionary astronomical ideas that emerged during the renaissance period. This new model was able to address the shortcomings of the Geocentric model, specifically the unusual path of planets that astronomers had earlier observed.


The work of Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe and his assistant Johannes Kepler led to an accurate description of planetary motions and laid the foundation for Isaac Newton's theory of gravitation. Kepler’s findings which were published in his book Astronomia Nova in 1609 were based on amazingly accurate novel astronomical data collected by Tycho Brahe in his observatory. The conclusions of Kepler’s work aligned with Copernicus’ heliocentric model but differed in the fact that according to him, the planets moved on elliptical (oval) paths rather than being objects fixed on nested spheres. This progress dramatically improved humanity's understanding of the universe and Kepler's laws of planetary motion are still widely used. With the invention of the telescope in the early 17th century, several observations and investigations suggested the validity of the heliocentric model and Kepler's work. Soon Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei popularized the use of telescopes to study and discover celestial objects. Among his several key findings, the notable ones were identifying the phases of Venus, discovering craters and mountains on the moon, and identifying Jupiter's four biggest moons (now known as Galilean moons in his honor).


While such important discoveries have greatly broadened the horizons of our understanding of the universe, countless questions still remain. However, if we continue to remain inquisitive of our surroundings, it’s only a matter of time for some long-sought answers to emerge. 

## Glossary

1. Babylonian astrology [[link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylonian_astrology)]
2. Geocentric model [[link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geocentric_model)]
3. Heliocentrism [[link](https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~rwest/wikispeedia/wpcd/wp/h/Heliocentrism.htm)]
4. Retrograde motion [[link](https://earthsky.org/space/what-is-retrograde-motion/)]

