---
layout: post
title:  "Peculiar Plasma"
author: aaghaz
categories: [ astronomy ]
image: assets/images/posts_main/plasma.jpg
useMath: True
---

Let me ask, what do you think is the most abundant state of matter in the universe? The answer is plasma. So, what is Plasma? Well, I mean we all would tend to answer that it is the fourth state of matter. But what exactly is it? Some people might say that it is an ionized gas. Though it is somewhat correct, that also isn’t entirely right. In fact, calling plasma ionized gas is analogous to calling liquid as a melted solid! 

The term plasma is applied to ionized gas, in which all of the atoms (or a considerable part) have been converted into positive ions. This definition will be improved upon towards the end of this article. Here we will explore some basic properties regarding this interesting state of matter.

Let’s start with an example of hydrogen plasma. To transform neutral H atoms into the  H+ + e- pair, we need energy as high as ε = 13.6eV (a rough estimate). Now to keep the hydrogen cloud in this state, the temperature must be at least Tmin =  ε/kb where kb is the Boltzmann Constant,  which is on the order of several electron volts! (Oh, a minor thing to keep in mind is that plasma physicists tend to view temperature in terms of energy units. So, 1eV is equivalent to 11,600K) This temperature is close to that on the star surfaces (and yet these are termed as “cold” plasmas!). Fusion plasmas have temperatures on the order of 108 K. Now, a thing to notice is that plasma can be a very good conductor depending on its parameters such as temperature or density. And as a result its macroscopic dynamics become a bit difficult to analyze because its mechanical properties are closely linked with its electrodynamic properties. This is one of the main features of plasma – Plasma flow produces an electromagnetic field, while the motion and equilibria of the plasma are determined by the fields acting upon it!

This property is crucial  and lies behind several plasma phenomena. One of them is storing or trapping plasma. I won't be diving into how the plasma is trapped but it’s done using a strong directed magnetic field. The interested reader may check out Mirror trap/Budker’s trap for more details. Another interesting thing which follows from the aforementioned property is the so-called “pinch effect”. To understand this, consider a cylinder with current flowing along its length as shown below. 

Now from basic electrodynamics it is known that currents in the same direction attract each other, and so the cylinder must compress. But, “thermal” or “gas” pressure opposes this inward force and hence the equilibrium determines the radius, the thermal pressure and the magnetic field at any point. This is known as a pinch. This is used in the tokamak configuration, which is another famous plasma trap! The pinch effect also gives rise to plasma instability in the form of “necks'' and “bubbles” but I won't be going into their details here. Just to give a taste, I have provided the image of a “neck” instability below.


If you think I have not been going into much detail into the previous topics, then fear not because I’ll be deriving (albeit using some mathematical and physical approximations) some well known properties of plasma! So here goes.

The most important property of plasma is it’s Quasi Neutrality. This means that although it does contain charged particles, plasma as a whole has charge roughly equal to zero! And it can be maintained precisely, due to the fact that it takes a large amount of voltage to separate the charges. To look at this in detail, consider a certain volume in which charges have been completely separated and hence it contains only one type of charge. So the electric field must satisfy Poisson’s eqn:
E=4πρ
Now, if linear dimensions and concentration of charge particles in the plasma are x and n respectively, we obtain
E ≈ E/x ≈ 4πne
and so, E  4πnex 
This means that V ≈ Ex ≈ 4πnex2
Now, consider a fully charged plasma produced from hydrogen, at normal temperature and pressure of 1 mm Hg. 1cc of this plasma has roughly 7*1016 ions and electrons each. And so, E is roughly 1011 V/cm. So, if quasineutrality is disturbed in a volume with diameter 1mm, the corresponding potential difference across the volume would come out to be 109 V which is clearly not feasible.
However, in small volumes quasineutrality may be violated if the electric field generated by excess particles  of one sign is too weak to significantly change the motion of particles. Let us look at it more quantitatively. Consider a plasma layer and let all electrons be displaced a bit with respect to  ions. In the figure shown below.

Let l be the separation between two faces of the cuboid above. S is the area of a face. If x is the spatial displacement (x≪l) then, at the boundary we have
dQdS=nex
Now, analogous to the parallel plate capacitor, we can see that 
E=Vl;V= QC;C=0Sl ⇒E=nex0
Now, taking into account that me/mi is very small as compared to 1, we can describe the electron motion using Newton’s second law as
md2xdt2=-eE=-ne2x0
where m = me. And so, as a result recognizing this as the equation of a harmonic oscillator we get
ω=p=ne2m0
This is the most typical collective motion of a plasma called Langmuir Oscillations. One interesting consequence is that two Langmuir waves can merge into a single wave with frequency very close to 2p. Since this can be measured by studying the radiation, it is used in measuring particle concentrations in intergalactic plasma!

The preceding derivation shows that some perturbations that disrupt quasineutrality are still possible but their characteristic time must not be too long:
t≤p-1
So, the speed of the fastest particle can be used to crudely derive the upper limit of radius of interaction.
x=vTet≤vTep≅rDe=0kbTne2
Where vTe=kbTm is the characteristic thermal speed. This magnitude rDe is called the Debye radius. 
Now we can introduce another criterion for plasma properties. If the number of charged particles inside the Debye sphere is great enough:
nrDe3≅0kbT32e3n-12 ≫1
Then, collective interactions inside a plasma dominate. So we see that as plasma becomes hotter and more rarified, the collective interactions become more dominant. For example, the plasma corona of a pellet irradiated with laser is very dense and extremely hot. Whereas intergalactic plasma is cold and extremely rarified. But in both the mentioned cases nrDe3≫1  and collective interactions dominate.

So, in this article I tried to explain the basics of this wonderful and peculiar part of physics called plasma. I hope the readers got a taste of what lies in this field and would like to explore more on their own. 
